---
layout: post
title:  "Patreon: Fee Avoidance by Rotating Creators"
date:   2017-12-09
categories: jekyll update
---
This post describes a way to avoid some of the additional fees that Patreon is
charging as part of their late-2017 [fee change](https://blog.patreon.com/updating-patreons-fee-structure/).
The process described here is annoying, and is not recommended if there are
other platforms that you can support those creators on, like
[Liberapay](https://liberapay.com/). This is just a way to reduce fees when
supporting creators on Patreon. If you want, you can jump straight to [how it
works](#the-algorithm).

Motivation
----------

I get unreasonably annoyed at credit card fees. We, as an economy, have somehow
decided that giving 2.9% + $0.35 to a payment processor every time we pay a
merchant is somehow OK. I go out of my way to support cash-only businesses, and
businesses that make payment processing fees explicit. A cost that customers
never notice paying is a cost that's hard to reduce.

If there existed a credit card that had 0 rewards, but charged a lower fee to
merchants, I would get that card. Since it would be a decision that is strictly
against my best financial interests, I would probably be the only one with such
a card.

When I heard that Patreon was changing their fee structure, I misunderstood
what they were doing, and my misunderstanding was great. I thought that Patreon
would make the current fees they were paying explicit. Ideally, this would also
lead to Patreon including lower-fee payment options, which would be better for
creators, marginally better for Patreon, and patrons would fund the actual cost
of what they fund. I was ready to have angry arguments on Twitter defending
Patreon's decision to a bunch of people who would rather have payment processing
fees ever-present in the background. (Note: This is a reasonable opinion to
have, just one I disagree with. If you prefer "background" payment processing
fees, the rest of this article still applies.)

Then my misunderstanding of what they were doing was corrected. They are
charging payment processing fees as if they didn't batch transactions, while
they are batching transactions. That's the worst of both worlds! It pisses off
people who would rather not think of processing fees, and it *really* pisses
me off, since I'm now paying *extra* fees, that Patreon is just pocketing in
addition to their 5%. (By the way, I think the work that Patreon is doing is
well worth their 5% fee. I would be less mad than I currently am if they just
bumped their fee up to 10%, since that would at be transparent.)

The 2.9% is fixed, but now the $0.35 is being added per charge. Since I pledge
7 creators for a total of $31 (once monthly per-creator), this change adds 6 *
$0.35 = $2.10, or 6.1% (of my new total of $34.35 = 31 * 1.029 + 0.35 * 7).
Previously, the money going to creators would still have to go through 1 $0.35
charge per month. Now it's 7, so 6 additional charges. Patreon is more than
doubling their fee in my case. I'm glad I didn't have those Twitter arguments,
because now that I understand the change, I am emphatically against it.

Patreon is now abandoning the monthly-batch charge that made me like them so
much. I am fine paying the processing fees. I am not okay with Patreon
intentionally moving to a system that charges additional processing fees, and
making me pay those fees. I can see some benefit in Charge Up Front, but the
implementation is silly. How about a pro-rated first charge with additional
fees, and a batch charge thereafter? How about an option to wait to get rewards
until my batch charge rolls around?

Before this change, Patreon had a strong network effect for me. I knew that
Patreon had to pay a flat fee for each credit card transaction. Creators were
paid out of post-transaction-fee money. If I had the option of paying a creator
on Patreon vs. some other service like [Drip](https://d.rip/), I chose Patreon.
Since my charges were batched monthly, more of my payment went to the creator
if I stayed on Patreon, as opposed to a new charge to a new service. This made
it easy to "tip" low amounts of money, knowing that my flat costs were covered,
and it was just 2.9% + Patreon's 5% that were being deducted.

Now there's no network effect. I will be shopping around and encouraging
creators I support to switch services.

The Algorithm
-------------

In order to get around these annoying fees, only make 1 charge on Patreon per
month. Rotate which creator you support, and support that creator enough to
last until the next rotation.

As an example, I currently support 7 creators, at levels of
[$2, $8, $3, $5, $3, $5, $5]. In the first month, I pledge only to creator 0,
at a level of $2 * 7 = $14. Next month, creator 1 at $8 * 7 = $56. And so on, at
$21, $35, $21, $35, and $35, starting the cycle again. Note that the list
above is ordered so that I don't have a bunch of high-pledging months in a row,
and stay close to my long-term average in the short-term.

This doesn't work for per-creation pledges, which I tend to avoid. I pledge a
monthly amount at a maximum of 1 creation per month on creators which as a
per-creation rate. (Yes, I realize doing this is kind of a dick move.)
Per-creation pledges can be taken into account by counting the total number of
creations since the last month that you supported that creator.

This solves the problem of Patreon taking that $0.35 fee more often than they
have any right to. If I really cared, I could batch my transactions even more,
and only pledge every other month, creating a 14 month cycle.

This "solution" sucks, though. It requires manual intervention by me every
month. It only gives me the rewards I've paid for occasionally, and gives me way
more rewards than I deserve the rest of the time.

Most importantly, it causes instability in the creator's income. If everyone did
this, then creators would have no way of seeing small trends, as their income
could flucuate wildly month-to-month, without any change in nominal support.
Patron counts would be significantly lower, as I would only count as a patron
one month out of 7.

Despite those real drawbacks, I will implement this strategy in my upcoming
pledges in 2018. December 2017 is the last month I have before these changes
come into effect. To the creators I support, I'm sorry. I just can't let Patreon
get away with this dishonest cash grab.
